Hello everyone and welcome to our December NHSR Webinar, The R Workflow. My name is Lynne Howard
and today I'm pleased to be joined by Ryan Johnson, who is a Customer Success Representative
at Posit, formerly known as rstudio. Today's webinar is being recorded and will be available
later on the NHSR Community website and YouTube page. If you have any questions,
please put them in the chat and Ryan will either answer them as we're going along,
or at the end of the session, depending on the amount of detail that is needed to answer them.
If you think of any questions after the webinar, please do feel free to contact us,
either using our Twitter page or via our very popular Slack channel, both of which again will
be shared in the chat or you can find the links on the community web page and community members
will be more than happy to help you. At the end of the webinar, we're going to use Mentimeter to
gather feedback and that link again will be shared in the chat. Please do let us know how you found
the session and we do appreciate your feedback, so thank you. So with more ado, over to you Ryan.
Great. Thank you, Linda. Great intro. I apologize everyone for starting a little bit late.
Hopefully we'll be able to play some catch up here and still sneak it in
within the hour. But again, if we have questions as we go through, just feel free to pop those into
the team's chat. So today's session is going to be on the R workflow and I know we're going to be
collecting some survey data afterwards. I'd be really interested to hear what everyone thinks
about this presentation because it's brand new. I actually had a previous version of it, but I
didn't really like it that much, so I redid it for this presentation, so certainly would appreciate
any feedback. It's going to be a bit of a whirlwind, so we're going to talk about a lot of
different things, but the whole goal is just to expose you to a bunch of different topics, tools
that you can use to improve your workflows in R. I'm going to go ahead in the chat and
I'll pop this link here, so if anyone wants to follow along with the code, let me just grab the
chat here. All right, so the link to all the code I'll be describing today will be here on GitHub,
or at least a pretty close variant of the code. All right, so we're going to dive right into it.
I don't want to waste any time with any introductory stuff. We're just going to
dive right into the typical workflow, and so this presentation will be focusing in on R,
but I would wager a guess that most workflows are going to follow this trajectory, where you
typically start with some dataset that can be a raw dataset, something like that, and then you're
going to be analyzing it. Now, that analysis could be cleaning it up, it could be performing some
machine learning, what have you, and then ultimately taking all those insights from
the analysis and reporting it, and that report can look very different, whether it's a web application
or static report. So, focusing in just on the data to start, so with this workflow, there's a lot of
questions about the data. Not all data is the same. So, what exactly is the data? What format?
Is it a CSE file, a text file? Is it going to be some massive, you know, compressed file?
Is it structured, or is it unstructured data? Next question is kind of where is the data? Is
this going to be a public dataset, so something that really anyone in the world can access,
or is it going to be private just to you or your group or your team? Are you working with
local data, so something that's on your physical computer or server, or do you have to access this
data in a remote location on some other server in the cloud? Is it in a database? Is it, you know,
again, structured data and a nice clean dataset where you can just make calls to that database,
or is it like a data lake, or is this kind of everything just kind of thrown into this data
lake? Maybe it's in an API, so you have to make specific calls to an API to get the exact data
that you want. How big is the data? Is this going to be a small dataset that can be easily consumed
by your analyses, or is this going to be some massive dataset where you're going to have to
think about some clever ways to deal with this huge data, and does the data change? You know,
there's a lot of different datasets out there. Some are static. You know, today, it'll be the
same dataset tomorrow, a year from now, 10 years from now, or this could be very fluid, so think
about, for example, COVID data, and this changes basically every single day, so you have to think
about stuff like that. So, the next in the workflow, you have your analyses, and this
really can vary depending on what your goals are, so what type of analysis you're running.
Are you doing that typical extract, transform, load, or ETL workflow where you're pulling in
some raw data, doing something to it, and then loading it back to, like, a database or somewhere
else? Are you doing some cleaning, modeling, simulation data, visualizations, lots of
different analyses? But a really important thing to think about is the compute power.
Is this something that you can run on your individual laptop, you know, maybe just
pumping out some quick plots, or is this going to be some massive, you know,
simulations on multiple nodes, huge parallel processing jobs? These are things you have to
think about as well. And then, finally, we have reporting, probably the most fun part about the
workflow, and this is ultimately how you're going to be informing the folks that, you know,
want to consume the analyses you just performed. So, when you report something, you know, how is
that report going to be delivered? Is it going to be hosted on a server, such as something like
Posit Connect, which we'll talk about? Is this going to be something you email folks? You know,
a lot of team members just love to live in their inbox, and sometimes you want to deliver those
insights via an email. Or maybe you make your findings or your models accessible via an API,
which we'll also talk a little bit about today. Similar to the dataset, you know, is the report,
does it also need to be updated? Is this going to be a single report, where, again, it's going to
have insights that it's kind of a one and done, that insights won't change over time, or do you
need to constantly refresh this report? And then, finally, what type of report are you going to be
delivering? You know, static reports, things like R Markdown, Core Tone, Jupyter Notebook,
these are all what we consider static reports, but then we also have web apps. And the web app
that we're going to focus in on today is going to be built using the Shiny framework, which I would
wager a lot of folks on the lines are at least familiar with Shiny, but if not, that's okay,
we're going to talk all about Shiny. So, to keep things nice and simple, this is the application
we're going to be working with today, and hopefully, this application looks familiar,
because this is the built-in Shiny application that comes with RStudio, all right? And so,
what we're going to do here in a second is we're going to create this Shiny application
and just walk through all the components to make sure everyone is familiar with this.
So, if you want to follow along, if you have an instance of RStudio open, whether that be in
Workbench, or on your desktop, or in Project Cloud, for example, feel free to follow along with this
portion, or you can just sit back and relax, take it all in. So, I'm going to be accessing
RStudio from within Posit Workbench, which is one of our professional tools, so it's a
server-based implementation of the RStudio IDE. So, I'm going to click on Workbench.
All right, so we have this welcome screen here, and I'm going to go ahead and open up a brand
new session, all right? So, I click on new session, I have the option of all these various
IDE, so VS Code, Jupyter Notebook, JupyterLab, or RStudio. We're going to stick with that,
and we'll just keep everything else the same. So, I'm going to go ahead and start this session,
and give it a few seconds to kick on, and it should plop us right into that RStudio session.
And while we go through this workflow, I'm also going to be touching upon some other best
practices for when you're working on projects, all right, within RStudio, or really kind of any
environment. And one of those best practices, so here we are within the RStudio IDE, we have a
console on the left-hand side, our environments pane in the top right, and our file browser down
here at the bottom. So, a good practice is any time you're going to be working with a new project,
or maybe you already have a pre-existing project, is always to leverage something known as RStudio
projects. Now, if you look in the top right corner here, you can see project none, and we want to
change that. We're going to make this a new project, all right. Now, why would you want to create a project?
It's just a great way to keep everything isolated within kind of a centralized environment, all right.
So, I don't need the scripts, the plots, reports, the packages, all that stuff is all going to be contained
within a single project. So, it keeps one project very isolated from another project, so you don't
get any cross-talk and cause any conflicts. So, let's go ahead and create a new project here within
RStudio. We get a few options here. We can start with a brand new directory, which is what we're
going to do. You can also, if you have some scripts and have some data already in a directory somewhere
on your file system, you can create a project within that directory, or you can pull in a new project
from version control, something like GitHub, for example. I'm going to stick with a brand new
directory. We're really going to start fresh here. Select new project. I'm just going to call this
nhsrworkflow. You do get the option to create a Git repository. So, if you're going to be using
version control, which we would highly recommend, you'd want to click this box. But for this demo,
we're going to leave it unchecked. And then you have the option to use RN, which is a really
great tool for keeping track of all those packages within this project. And again, it's highly
recommended you do that as well, but we're going to leave it unchecked just for simplicity's sake
for this demo. And we'll hit create project. So, anytime you create a new RStudio project,
it's going to open up a brand new RStudio session. So, if you're within Workbench or
running RStudio locally. All right. So, now we're in a fresh RStudio project. And I know that because
if you look in the top right corner here, you see nhsrworkflow. And you can also see my current
path, which is listed right here in the top left. You can see I'm within that working directory. So,
this is my new home directory for this project. And this is where we're going to put all of our
scripts and analyses for this RWorkflow. All right. So, we've created this fresh RStudio project.
Let's go ahead and create that Shiny application. So, in the top left corner, you'll see this
little green plus. This is a great way to just get started with various scripts, APIs, applications,
documents, which we'll talk about here. You can also see Shiny web app. So, I'm going to go ahead
and click on this. And I'm just going to call this test app nhs. I'm going to hit create.
All right. So, if you're not familiar with Shiny, this is a Shiny application over here on the left
hand side. First and foremost, it is R code. All right. So, that's something that we believe very
heavily at Posit is that all data science should be code based. Shiny is no exception here.
So, when you have a Shiny application open within RStudio, you do get this additional
button right here to run this application locally within RStudio. So, I can do that.
And here we have the rendered Shiny application. Let me make my screen a little bit bigger.
There we go. All right. So, here is my rendered Shiny application. And I can slide this far to
the left. I can slide it to the right. And you can see it changes the number of bins in our
histogram. All right. So, a very simple Shiny application, but it does demonstrate the power
of Shiny, the ability to interact with your data and kind of get these live results.
So, we have that application running. Let me actually re-render it here just so we can kind
of see what's going on as we go through some of the code. But because we're going to be leveraging
this Shiny application for this demo, I want to make sure that we have a firm understanding of
all the code that's going on behind the scenes. So, I'm just going to quickly run through it.
We're going to start right here at line 10. Everything above line 10 are just comments
to the author. So, these aren't actually executed. You can see line 10, we're going to load the Shiny
package. Make my screen a little bit bigger. There we go. After we do that, we define the user
interface. All right. Now, for this demo, for this session, we're not going to be really focusing in
on the user interface. But I just want to quickly go over it so you know what's going on. All right.
So, we're going to leverage a fluid page, a sidebar layout format. So, the first thing we
have right here is our title panel. So, you can see that's reflected right here.
And then we only have one input, and that's going to be the slider input. We're giving it the input
ID of bins. Then everything else is just going to be unique to the slider input, like the name,
so number of bins, the min, max, and the default value, which you can see is set to 30. And then
we have our main panel, which you can see is showing our histogram. All right. So, that's
going to be shown right here as this plot. Again, for the most part, we're not going to be focusing
on the user interface. But now you know a little bit more about it. But we are going to spend some
time talking about the server. Server is where all of the code that runs behind the scenes of
your Shiny application lives. So, we have a few things here. We're creating a plot. All right.
We're saving it as this plot, which again gets sent to the user interface up here.
And then within this render plot, we have some data. We're going to use a built-in data set
called the faithful. Sorry to interrupt you, Ryan. Your screen seems to be cut off on the left-hand
side. Okay. Let me see if I can move it a little bit. Does that help at all, or is it still?
No, that's not moved. All right. What if I do?
Yep. We can see everything. Okay. Whoops. Okay. Thank you. All right. So, we'll just have to
give it a little squish, but that's okay. All right. Yeah. If anything like that happens again,
definitely feel free to interrupt me. All right. So, just running through again all the
code in our server function. So, we have our data set. This is the faithful Geyser data set. We'll
talk about this in detail. We're going to save it to a variable called X. We have another line
right here on line 41. This is really going to be our analysis, which we'll talk more about
in detail. And then we have the actual code to draw the histogram using this function. And that's
pretty much it. Down here at the very bottom is just a call to that Shiny app function to just
run the Shiny application. All right. So, now that we have a little bit more of an understanding
of what's going on behind the scenes of the Shiny application, a hypothetical question for everyone
here on the line. No need to answer it. Just something to think about. Well, let's say your
business or your company, whatever you're building, it absolutely 100% depended on this application
running correctly, quickly. Would you be comfortable if your team, your company,
depended or relied on this application that we just showed you? So, this is something to think
about. Now, I would make an argument to say, yes, sure. I think this application is pretty good.
Why is that? Because it's consistent. The data doesn't change. I'll show you what that data
looks like here in a second. It's very simple. It just has one input, one output, one data set.
And it's pretty fast. So, you saw as I slid the bar to the left and right, it responded
pretty quickly. These are all characteristics of a good production-ready Shiny application.
But not all apps are going to be this simple. So, when we talk about this specific application,
what are we actually talking about? So, we have a report. And this report is going to be a Shiny
application. And within that Shiny application. So, when we were going over that code, we had
all the code for the analysis. And we had all the code that imports the data set. So, everything's
basically contained within the Shiny application. And that's totally fine. You know, for this
application, because it's fast, because it's simple, because it's consistent, you don't need
to change this application. So, it's really important to know when and when you should,
when you shouldn't overengineer applications or any type of reporting for that matter.
So, a good rule of thumb is that, you know, don't overengineer workflows if you don't need to.
But like I mentioned in the last slide, you know, not all apps are going to be this simple. So,
it is important to know when to not necessarily overengineer, but to think about different ways
to engineer your applications, your reports, so that you can scale accordingly. And we're going
to go ahead and start here with the data. So, let me just get everyone up to speed on what
exactly is this data. So, looking again at our server function in our Shiny application,
we're using something known as Faithful. All right? So, this is a built-in data set to R.
So, when you download R onto your computer or server, the Faithful data set's already there
for you. And it's just a good data set to play around with, try out some visualizations for you
to test out. And specifically, we're going to be extracting the second column as a vector and
saving it to the value of X. So, this is what, just kind of a snippet of what this data looks like.
I'm just showing the first 14 columns, or rows, sorry. And we have two columns in this data set.
You can see eruptions, which is the first column, and the second one is this waiting column.
And these correspond, at least in the first column, this is the amount of time in minutes.
Every time Old Faithful, which is a big geyser somewhere in the western United States,
I think it's in Yosemite, every time it erupts, it takes that long in minutes. And then from time to
the next eruption is shown in minutes over here in the second column. So, as a reminder, we're
going to be extracting the second column as our data for this application. And I'm showing you
that data right here. So, this is the second column of the Faithful Geyser data set extracted
as a vector. And you can see it's a little over 270 numeric values in length. And that's it. It's
a pretty simple data set. You can see the numbers right here. It all fits nicely onto the screen.
But again, going back to that previous slide, what if this data changed every single day?
Like maybe they just continued to add data every single time Old Faithful geyser erupted.
What if the data wasn't built into R? Maybe it was stored somewhere else and you needed to import
it into your workloads. What if others wanted to share this data with your other teammates? Sure,
it's pretty easy when the data is built into R, but what about if it's not? And then what if this
data was not this small? Maybe it was actually millions and millions of rows in length and
hundreds of gigabytes in size. That definitely kind of changes how you're going to approach this
data set. So that brings us to our first workflow. So rather than just simply having a data set built
into the Shiny application, we're going to take that data set and we're going to save it as
something as a pin. And this pin, we're going to pin it to something known as Posit Connect,
which is one of our professional tools. This is kind of our publishing platform, which we'll talk
more about here in a second. But let's talk a little bit about pins. Maybe some of you have
heard about it on the call and maybe some of you haven't. And that's okay. I think pins is a really
underutilized tool, which can help improve a lot of your workflows. So pins is an open source R
package, just like Shiny, something that we've developed here at Posit. And what it allows you
to do is publish or pin data, models, any other R object to a board, right? And that makes it
really easy to share across projects and also with your colleagues. And so like I just mentioned,
you can pin these objects to boards and these boards could be a variety of things. But for this
workflow, we're going to leverage Posit Connect as our board. So just like you take a piece of paper
and pin it to a cork board, you can pin your data and pin it to a Connect board. And it really makes
your data so you can easily update it. You can version it. So it just makes your data a little
bit more flexible. So we're going to pin our data to Posit Connect, but we need an additional tool
to basically house all the code in order to do this. And we're going to leverage something known
as Quarto. So Quarto is something we're really excited about. It's a brand new tool that we
announced at our conference back in July, I believe, June or July. And it's very similar to
R Markdown. So if anyone on the call is familiar with R Markdown, you can basically consider it
R Markdown 2.0. But it's really tailored to scientific and technical publishing. And what's
unique about it, as opposed to R Markdown, is you can create these using whatever language you want.
So you can use R, which is what we're going to do, but you can use Python, Julia, Observable,
and you can use whatever IDE you want as well. So we're going to stick within the RStudio IDE,
but you can also create Quarto documents using VS Code, Jupyter, or any other text editor.
And similar to Pins, you can also take Quarto documents and host them on Posit Connect
and set them up for job scheduling, which is a really cool workflow and something we'll actually,
I'll talk about here in a second. All right, so what we're going to go ahead and do here
is we're going to take our data set, that second column from the gadget data set,
and we're going to pin it to Posit Connect. And we're going to do that using Quarto.
All right, so I'm going to come back here to the RStudio IDE. So we have our Shiny application.
I'm going to go ahead and close out of this, and I'm going to open up a Quarto document.
So you can see in these starter scripts, we have Quarto document. I'll go ahead and select this.
I'm just going to say NHS pin data, hit create.
Hit create. And here is our Quarto document. And you can see by default,
it's leveraging our visual editor mode, which just makes working with these documents really
nice and pretty. But you can also edit them and using source code, which looks much more like
your typical R Markdown. But we'll stick with visual because I do think it's nice to play around
with. It does come kind of pre-built with some code, some text in there. But I'm just going to
go ahead and delete all of this so we can start fresh. All right, so let's go ahead and take that
faithful Geyser dataset, and we're going to create a pin and pin it to RStudio Connect.
So we're going to step through this bit by bit. The first thing we need to do is load our packages.
All right, so I'm going to go ahead and insert an R code chunk here, and I'm going to load the
library pins package. So because we're taking this faithful Geyser dataset and pinning it,
we need to make sure we have pins. I'm going to go ahead and run this and just make sure I have
pins in my environment. Looks like it loaded just fine, but if it didn't, you just have to install
that. All right, after that, we're going to go ahead and filter and save our data. And I'll go
ahead and have another R code chunk here. And we're going to, just like in our Shiny application,
we're going to save our data as an X variable. All right, and we're going to assign it to the
faithful Geyser dataset, just the second column. All right, so I can run this and just make sure
that looks good. You can see in my environment pane, I have X. I can run it down here. Yep,
that all looks correct. So the goal now is we want to take this data and we want to pin it
to RStudio Connect. All right, so that's going to be the next section here, pin to Posit Connect.
So I'm going to go ahead and just copy a few things from that GitHub repository I shared in
the chat. And the first thing here is our board. So I mentioned that pins, you need a place to
actually pin your pins. In this example, we're going to be using Posit Connect. And so I have
the URL to our demo server of Posit Connect right here. All right, we call it Colorado. I have no
idea why, it's just what we call it. So this is the actual server of Posit Connect we're going
to be using. And you do need to supply a Connect API key just so that Connect knows who's pinning
this data set. So we're going to use the pins board RS Connect function to basically register
this board. So I'll hit play here. And you can see connecting to RStudio Connect or Posit Connect,
and that looks correct. All right, so we've now registered it, that's good. And now we're going
to go ahead and write the pin. And it's a very intuitive function called pin write. All we have
to do is supply the board. So we'll just leave that as board, the data set x, and then we can
give a name as well. So I'm going to go ahead and call it faithful geyser data. And that's it.
So I'll go ahead and run that code chunk. And you can see it's going to write as an RDS file
writing to pins faithful geyser data. So that's it. Think of this as like saving it to like a
Dropbox or an S3 bucket. We're just taking a data set and we're saving it to Posit Connect
so that others can use it or you could potentially use it in other workflows.
Now I'm going to switch over to Posit Connect here. I'm just going to refresh here and show
you what this pin looks like. All right, so here is that data set, that pin data set we just pinned.
I can click on it. It's not going to show you much, but what it does show you, which is really
helpful, is it gives you the code so you can import this data set into another script or another
workflow. So loading the pins, registering the board, instead of pin write, we can use pin read.
All right, so we're going to use this here in a second, but this is what a pin looks like
once it's hosted on Connect. Now actually, let me go back to this document really quick. So this is a
Quarto document. Now this data set, it doesn't change. Every time I run this command, it's
going to be the same data set. But again, think about what if your data changed every single day
and you might want to rewrite this pin every single day so it's updated with that new data.
So I'm going to go ahead and save this document. I'm going to call it test Quarto
pin geyser. I'm going to hit save. Now the first thing I want to do here is I want to publish
this Quarto document to PositConnect. Just like we published a pin, we're going to publish it
to Connect, but we're going to use a kind of a canonical format. So we're going to use a
Quarto document to PositConnect. Just like we published a pin, we're going to publish it to
Connect, but we're going to use a kind of a canonical publishing workflow. So we're going
to click on this little blue button right here. And we want to publish this to our studio or
PositConnect. Publish document with the source code. So if you want to set it up for job scheduling,
you do need to make sure you include the source code. It's going to ask, you know, what Connect
server. So we're going to use that Colorado Connect, which I mentioned before. We can leave
the title the same. We're just going to publish the single Quarto document, which is that QMD
ending. We'll hit publish. So if you've never published anything to Connect before,
that's pretty much it. Once I hit publish, RStudio takes care of the rest. It's going to
capture my environment. So what packages I'm using, what versions of those packages,
what version of R am I using. It sends all that information to PositConnect. Connect reads it,
replicates my environment, and then publishes this Quarto document.
So let's give us a few more seconds to run.
And then once it's done, it should automatically pop open in Connect. And here we have that Quarto
document now hosted on PositConnect. And what I'll do first and foremost is I'm going to open
this up to everyone here on the line. So I'm going to set the sharing settings to anyone,
no login required, and hit save. I'm going to grab the URL here at the top, come back into the chat,
and paste it here. So now everyone here on the line can see that Quarto document we just created.
And once we have it here, one of the important features I wanted to demonstrate is job
scheduling. So you can see over here on the right hand side, we have the schedule tab.
And let's say I want to update this pin every single morning. So I can schedule it,
select my time zone, when I want it to start, and run daily. So it's pretty much all ready to go
here. Run every weekday, Monday through Friday, or every other day, every day. And that all looks
good. Hit save. And now this pin will automatically be updated every single morning at 841 AM.
All right, so just a powerful way to kind of improve your workloads, especially if you have
data that needs to constantly be updated. You can set it up to run using Quarto. You can do
this with R Markdown as well, and even Jupyter Notebooks. Okay, so coming back to our slides,
and apologies if I'm going a little quick here. I know we're only about 20 minutes left.
But this is our starting point. So we had our Shiny application, we had all of our analyses,
and the data within the Shiny application. And what have we done so far? Well, effectively,
we've taken the data and moved it outside of the Shiny application. All right, so now the Shiny
app, this data is within a pin, with the help of Quarto posted on PositConnect.
So let's move on to our analyses. And I mentioned previously, there's really only
one analysis in the Shiny application. And that is the calculation of this bins variable.
So you can see we're using the seek function, it's going to take the min value of the x data,
so that faithful gadget data set, it's the max value, so min and max, it generates a vector
of length input bins. So whatever that slider bar is set to, it's going to be that number of bins.
So what does this actually look like? So we have our Shiny application right here,
and we have the number of bins set to seven. All right, we can see this number right here
is gonna be set to seven, and then we get this vector right here, it's actually seven plus one,
I'll kind of explain why here. All right, so there's bins, and this example of seven
computes to this numeric vector. And there's actually eight values here, because it corresponds
to every single border of these bins. So starting over here on the left-hand side, this left bin,
that's numeric value 43, and you have one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, all the way to
the left-hand side, which is eight. And those all again correspond to this bin vector.
Not a very compute-heavy analysis, but just for the sake of conversation,
now what if these analyses were more compute-intensive? So you had this massive simulation
or machine learning model you're computing, that could take a long time to run, it could leverage
a lot of CPU and memory. And what if you wanted to access the results using a different language?
So maybe you've created a model, for example, but you want to use your model within Python
or Julia or something like that. How could you do that? So we're going to do that using another
tool called Plumber. Plumber is a way for you to create APIs using nothing but R code. So if you're
like me, when you first started with your R coding journey, the concept of an API was so foreign to
me and so scary to me, I didn't even want to touch it. But Plumber makes things really easy. We're
going to go through an example here of creating an API. And really, ultimately, what you're doing
is taking your normal R code that you've already written, and you're decorating it. And I'll show
you what the decorations look like here in a second. But the one thing you do need to know
for creating a Plumber API is you do need to know how to write an R function. We're going to go over
that here now. All right, so let me just go ahead, and we're going to create and publish a Plumber
API. So I'm going to come back here to RStudio, and within RStudio Workbench, we're going to close
out of this Quarto document. I'll clean my screen here using Ctrl-L. And let's go ahead and create
a Plumber API. So starting with that same starter script dropdown menu, you can see we have Plumber
API right here. So go ahead and click on this. I'll call this NHS. And the goal of this API is to
compute the bins. So I'll just call that, and I'll put API here at the end. And hit Create.
All right. So this is an example Plumber API. So similar when you create a Quarto document or a
Shiny application using this dropdown. It has some stuff pre-populated in here, but we're not
going to worry too much about this stuff. So I'm going to go ahead and delete pretty much all of
this except for the library Plumber. There's also this comments up here just for the author. We
really don't need those either. So I'm going to go and delete those too. So we're really just
starting with library Plumber. So the first thing I mentioned before is that in order to create an
API using Plumber, you do need to write a function. So this function, the whole goal is to calculate
the number of bins for your histogram. So I'm going to just create an example function. We're
going to call it foo for right now. And we're going to use the function function to create this
function. All right. That sounds a lot of functions. So I'm only going to take one argument. That's
going to be the number of bins. And then once you've defined your arguments, we basically open up
the body of our function. So we use these curly brackets and everything, all the kind of the code
you compute is going to happen within these curly brackets. The first thing we want to do is I want
to obtain that pinned data set. So I mentioned before we have that pin on PositConnect. Let's
go ahead and access that. Now before we do that, we first have to connect to that board again.
So I'm going to come up here and I'm going to first copy and paste some code. So we're going to
library pins and make sure the pins packages updated. And this is basically the same code
that we had in our last quarter document. We just want to make sure we have the connect board
registered. Now once we have that, we can read in pinned data. So we'll do that in the next step
here, this data set, we're going to stick with x. And we're going to do pins.
Pin read very similar to pin write this and read, we're going to do board. And then we do need to
give it the name of our pin data set. So I come back here to right here, you can see this is the
name of our pin data set. So it's my first name followed by the name we gave it. So go ahead and
copy that and pin it here. All right, so that's going to pull in that pin data set from the pin
on PositConnect rather than pulling it from that built-in data set. Now once we have that, we want
to calculate calculate bin breaks. All right, so this is going to be the code which we extracted
from that Shopify application. So we're going to use that seek function, and we're gonna find the
min value of x, the max value of x, and the length out is going to be the number of bins, so n bins.
And I just want to make sure this is numeric. So it's one thing important with APIs is sometimes
they're fed in as character values. So I just want to make sure this is converted to numeric.
All right, and then we also want to make sure we do plus one.
All right, and that should be pretty much it. So let's make sure this works as intended. So I'm
going to go ahead and source this foo function. So if I come into my environments here, you can
see the function foo is now in there. And I can try it out down here. So let's say foo,
and I'm going to say seven. All right, I run that. We get a little message here, don't worry too much
about that. But you can see here we have returned the numeric vector of our bin breaks. So that
works out well. So this function is performing as we intended. I'm going to go ahead and delete
the name right here. So we pretty much have the scaffolding for our Plumber API. Now we just have
to decorate our code. So what we're going to do here is I'm going to first give the little syntax
here of a hashtag with an asterisk. All right, this is kind of the comments you use to decorate
your code using Plumber API. We use the at symbol here, and we already get a pop-up menu
with all these various options of how we want to decorate it. So I'm going to say API title,
and we can call it whatever you want. So I'm going to say Geyser Plot or Geyser Bins API.
All right, so that looks good. And then we come down here, and I'm going to give it a description.
So this is just helping you or anyone else that wants to leverage your API. So we'll say API
description, and we'll say this is going to return vector of bin breaks. The next one we're
going to add here is something called add params. Now I mentioned before in our function, it just
takes one argument. This is going to be our parameters, this end bins. So we need to find
what that parameter is going to be, so end bins. And then we can give it a description, so number
of bins that you want to calculate. And then the last thing in is going to be our endpoint. So
don't worry too much about the logistics of APIs, but just know that when you call an API, it's
calling an endpoint, and we need to define that here. So we're going to use the get parameter
right here, and it's going to be the breaks. And you'll see kind of what this looks like here in a
second. And that's it. These are our code decorations. This is what makes our API an API.
And what you can see here is similar to a Shiny application. We actually get this
button right here to run this API locally. So I'm going to go ahead, I'm going to make
my screen a little bit smaller here, and we're going to run this API first within our studio.
You'll see we get this Swagger interface, right? And we can try out this API. Now APIs are
typically for computer-to-computer communication, and so that's why we can use a Swagger interface
so a human can interact with your API. So we're going to try this one out. Number of bins,
let's go ahead and say 28. We'll execute it, and you can see it returns in its JSON format. These
are all of our bin breaks. So it looks like it's behaving in the way we expect. So once that is
ready to go and it's working well, we can go ahead and publish this to RStudio Connect just like we
did with the Cordo document. So we'll just give this a few seconds to run. And again, it's very
similar to when we publish Cordo. It's going to capture my environment, like what packages am I
using, what versions, the version of R, which I'm using 4.2, you can see up in the top right corner,
and then it publishes it to PositConnect. All right, while this is loading, I'm going to go
ahead and open it up, and I'm going to go ahead and share it with everyone here on the line so
you can actually see it. So I'll copy this, come into the chat. Now similar to that Cordo document,
everyone here on the line should be able to interact with this Geyser dataset or this API.
And just to kind of demonstrate that it does in fact work, so I can still come in here. We have
our get our endpoint. I can try it out, and you can put in whatever number you want here, like
we'll say 44, hit execute. It's still behaving as expected. All right, so I'm going to come back
here to our slides, and we're going to kind of try to wrap things up here in the next few minutes.
Again, this was our starting point. We had everything contained within the Shiny application,
but what have we effectively done now? We've moved the data outside of the Shiny app,
and now we've moved the analysis outside of the Shiny app in the form of an API.
And so our last little exercise here is we're going to build our brand new Shiny application.
It's going to ultimately do the exact same thing as that first Shiny app I showed you,
but we're going to over-engineer it a little bit. So the first thing we're going to do is read in
that pinned data set, and then we're going to obtain the bin breaks using that plumber API,
and then we're going to just use Shiny. Within the Shiny code, we're going to use that same
hist function to draw the histogram. So this is going to be our new Shiny application.
So let me come back here, close out of this. I'm going to come back to that same test app,
NHS, that we created before. All right, so this is our original Shiny application,
and I can just run it, and it behaves just like before, slides to the left, slides to the right.
Let's go ahead and over-engineer it using that same workflow I mentioned before.
So pretty much everything here in the server function where we generate the plot, we're going
to go ahead and delete all this, and we're going to plop in some new logic here. All right, this
is going to be where we're going to, you know, put in that pin, we're going to put in that API,
and then redraw that histogram. So the first thing we need to do is, again, grab that pinned
data set. All right, so rather than using that faithful, grabbing the second column,
we're just going to read in our pinned data set, which again is updated every single day,
which is really nice. But again, because we're using pins, we have to make sure the pins package
is loaded. So I'll do library pins, and then we also want to make sure that we register our
connect board. So I'm just going to copy this code again, and make sure it's there. All right,
so that should all work just fine. So we have our pinned data set. Now we're going to get the
vector of bin breaks from the API. Now I'm going to add in some additional code here,
which we haven't talked about. Basically, this is going to be code to call the API.
We're going to use another package called httr, which is a really great R package for making calls
to APIs. All right, so we'll come back down here. I'm just going to copy some of this code right
here, and I'll quickly show what's going on. All right, so we're going to save everything again to
this bins function. And really, this is the main part you need to look at right here. All right,
so we're going to use from the httr package's get function, and we're going to call our API.
So I actually need to update this, because our API is called something different.
So let me come back here, and you can see here's the new API. So let me just go ahead and grab this
URL, and plop that into our API. All right, so we're calling this API, and we're going to query
this single argument, single parameter. That's going to be the end bins, and it's going to take
that input from our Shiny application. So that's slider bar input. All right, so that's all we need
to do there. And then the last thing we need to do is just draw the histogram. I'm just going to
copy this code right here for time's sake here. All right, so drawing the histogram, same thing
as before. All right, so this is now our over-engineered Shiny application. We call in
our pin data set. We call the API. We use these variables. Now we've just computed to redraw our
histogram. Let's go ahead and run it. Fingers crossed everything works fine. So it might take
a second or two for that API to basically spin up an active R session so that I can compute that data.
And once it does that, there we go. We have our Shiny application. Now I can slide to the left,
slide to the right, and it behaves just like before. And then what we can also do is just
because we've been doing it the whole time, we can go ahead and publish this Shiny application
to PositConnect so everyone here can interact with it. All right, I know we only have four minutes
left. That's pretty much all I wanted to discuss today. There are a few other things if you want to
just explore more about improving your workflows. So as a recap, what we've done in this presentation
is we've over-engineered the heck out of that Shiny application. If you don't need to do that,
then you shouldn't. You always want to keep things nice and simple, easy to read,
and for your future self or any of your collaborators, for example.
But if things start to get really complex, you have large data sets, updated data sets,
modeling, then it's good to know about all these tools that can potentially improve your
workflows. Things like Pins, Quarto, R Markdown, Quarto, job scheduling. So keep these in mind.
And if you want to learn more, I'll include these slides in a follow-up email so you guys have them.
But there is a really great page called our Solutions page. So just go to solutions.posit.co.
And we have a few other workflows that you can explore, a lot of which leverage the same logic
we talked about. So Pins, Plumber. This one uses R Markdown, but you can use Quarto, some other
tools in there like Vetiver, for example. And you can see all of the code and everything that goes
into them right here. All right. And the last thing I wanted to do is just I want to share that
application with everybody that we just published. So it's just going to load up here.
But while it's doing that, I will come back here. All right. So that's pretty much all I have.
I know we have a whopping two minutes for questions. Feel free to pop those into the chat.
If I can't address them here, then I can certainly do a follow-up session or I can
follow up with the email. OK, I can see there is already a question in the chat from O regarding
can the Pins server be set up to be hosted on a Dockerized instance?
I think. Yep. So, yeah, Pins is first and foremost open source. And if you go to the Pins website,
which Pins, I think it's still RStudio.com. So I will paste this here into the chat.
It talks a little bit more about all the various types of boards you can leverage.
So you can use Connect, you can use Dropbox, you can use F3 buckets. So you might be a little bit
constrained to what you can pin to. But for the most part, if it's within a Docker environment
and that Docker environment has access to a board, or again, be whatever you want to include,
then yes, you can absolutely use it. There's no pay for offering here. It's all open source.
It doesn't need RStudio server, for example. You can run it using
the local instance of RStudio as well. OK, there's also a question on what the
Plumber package is used for. What Plumber is used for?
It's a good question. I'm not sure if I fully understand the context of it. But Plumber,
again, is just a way to create these REST APIs using nothing but R code.
So if you're looking to deliver a machine learning model, it can be really hard to have folks use
your model. They want to actually have some data and they want to use your model to get some type
of output. An API is a great way to do that. So you can kind of input your various parameters
that goes into that API, and then it can spit out the results of your machine learning model.
But there's a lot of great use cases for Plumber. There was actually a really great talk at the
NHSR conference about Plumber and some of those good use cases for that as well.
Fantastic. Right, we're now up to two o'clock. So all that remains is me to thank you for a
fantastic, very interesting presentation. I think you've highlighted what fantastic potential
R and RStudio continues to have for us within the NHS as part of our workflows.
Thank you to everybody who's attended and for asking questions. In the chat,
you will find the link to the Mentimeter survey so that you can give us feedback, or you can also
give us feedback by joining the website or by tweeting us. Links for all of those are in the chat.
Hopefully, you will all come and join us again for next month's webinar on the 18th of January,
which will be with Matt Dray from the Cabinet Office, who's looking at creating reproducible
and accessible spreadsheets using AliTables. So hopefully, we'll see you all for that.
Thank you very much for joining us. And if you celebrate Christmas, have a lovely Christmas.
And if you're working over the festive period, thank you very much.
Thank you, everybody.